Hi.
My name is Brian Caffo and
this is a lecture on experimental
design and observational analysis.
I'm gonna begin this lecture
with a quote from R.A.
Fischer, one of the forefathers
of modern statistics and
probably the greatest thinker
ever about experimental design.
And he said to call in the statistician
after the experiment is done,
may be no more, than asking him to
perform a post-mortem examination,
He may be able to say what
the experiment died of.
So, in this lecture we're gonna talk
about the difference between experimental
design and observational studies.
And so, let me go a little bit
deeper into what these two subjects
are really talking about.
Experimental design is the case
where you have tight control
over several aspects of the experiment.
So, good experimental design
can do things like account for
known important factors through things
like blocking and stratification.
In addition, it can account for
unknown factors through randomization.
We'll have an entire
lecture on randomization.
Experimental design in terms of getting
a good sample via random sampling,
can help us get an unbiased sample for
extrapolating to the population that
we're interested in extrapolating to.
If you execute good
experimental design and
everything goes well, often it eliminates
the need for complex analyses.
Simple analysis usually suffice and
are better in these settings.
And they help us isolate
the effects of interest.
In contrast,
in an observational experiment,
this is the opposite setting where
you don't have tight control
over the experiment and you can't
have good control over the sample.
You can't randomly assign treatments,
and these sorts of things.
In a purely observational experiment,
you're just observing the data,
collecting it as it occurs, and
this has some benefits as well.
For example, it's often feasible
when designed experiments are not.
You can't, for
example, ethically randomize
people in a smoking trial, right?
You can't randomize some people to
have to smoke and other people to not.
As a consequence of just getting
the data as it roles in,
often both by necessity and
just by happenstance.
Observational studies often
have very large sample sizes.
They're usually a lot
cheaper to execute as well.
The process of designing an experiment,
and
if you're collecting data on,
for example, medical trials,
clinical studies are extremely expensive,
thousands of dollars per subject.
Often observational studies can
get much larger sample sizes and
thus by having a much lower
dollar cost per record.
However on the negative side, in order
to get things out of observational data
analysis, you often need
much more complex modeling.
Because you haven't been able
to do things, like control for
known important factors
as part of the design.
You haven't been able to inject
randomization into your analysis
to help control for the unknown factors.
So, you have to try and figure out and
measure everything possible.
So, it's often the case,
it's almost always the case that
an observational study needs these larger
sample sizes to accommodate the much
more complex analysis that
you have to do to study them.
And by the way,
this picture here on this slide
Statistical Methods, Experimental Design,
and Scientific Inference by R.A.
Fisher is sort of a classic in this area.
Fisher was one of the forefathers of the
thinking on modern experimental design.
So, all I want to do is
really set the stage for
the next couple of lectures, where we're
going to cover several key topics of
experimental design versus
observational analysis.
As an example, we're going to
talk about sampling and bias.
And we'll give the specific example
of when the Chicago Tribune
announced errantry, that Dewey defeated
Truman in the Presidential election.
And much of their error was in this
particular form of bias sampling.
The collection of people that they polled,
weren't the right collection of people
to make the conclusions that
they were interested in.
We'll talk about randomization and
a, b testing, so
randomization is the process
when you have a treatment or
something that you're interested in
studying that say has two levels of
randomly assigning the observational
units to those two levels.
And so, the classic example of this is in
a medical trial, where you have a drug or
something like that and you give
a random set of people the drug and
you give another random
set of people the placebo.
And the idea is that the group of people
that receive the drug and the group of
people that receive the placebo, other
than receiving the drug or the placebo.
Are otherwise similar, so you're comparing
apples to apples or oranges to oranges,
if you will.
Because the randomization
has helped ensure that
everything else that might contaminate our
results was at least equally distributed
among the groups with high probability.
So, we'll have a lecture
on randomization and
this forms the basis of
so-called clinical trials and
AB testing which are bedrock methods
in data science and biostatistics.
Confounding is another core topic that
occurs In observational data analysis.
When you don't have randomization and
you need to think about variables
that can contaminate your results.
You have to think about confounding,
and here Jeff came up with this funny
example of the number of people who
drowned by falling into a pool,
how it correlated with films that
Nicolas Cage appeared in, and
finally, we're gonna talk about
causal inference and counterfactuals.
So, causal inference is the idea of trying
to use observational or experimental
data to get a true statistical cause,
rather than just association.
And we're going to only consider one
particular way of thinking about
causal inference, and
that's the idea of a counterfactual.
Where you consider two states
of existence, one where
a person has received the treatment for
example, and one where a person has not.
And in this case,
the same person is in both these pictures.
This is Christian Bale in both pictures.
So, counterfactuals or
the idea of thinking
along the lines of what
would happen to each of
my observational units if they didn't get
the treatment that they actually received?
So, of course,
you don't actually get to observe this.
If you give a person a drug,
you only get to observe them
after they've had the drug.
You don't get to observe
what would've happened,
had they not received the drug, okay?
But counterfactual thinking forms
the basis of causal thinking, so
we'll have a lecture on that.
That way of thinking will help us a, and
I hope after that lecture you'll see this,
will help us a, improve the way that
we come up with statistical designs.
To analyze data.
It's because we'll be thinking casually.
And b, it'll help us think about
observational data analysis in a way
that will help us question our
assumptions, so that we can
think about if we're gonna try to make
the leap from associations to causation.
What sort of assumptions
are we making to do it?
So, hopefully you'll get
a lot out of that lecture.
The final thing I talk about is blocking,
and
in blocking this comes from the idea
of agricultural experiments,
where you have a field where there
might be some sort of gradient.
For example, the water is distributed
differently along rows of the crops.
Or the soil is distributed differently and
crops tend to be conveniently
actually sectioned into rows anyway.
I have a picture of one here.
So, Ari Fischer worked in agricultural
experiments, so we actually talk about
blocking, we tend to think in terms of
these sorts of agricultural experiments.
So, the idea, if you know that something
like the soil or the water along rows
of your crops, may impact the outcome that
you'd like to study, like your crop yield.
Then if you're gonna do
something like randomization,
why not do it within the rows, okay?
So, make sure you condition on the row.
Okay?
And randomize within the rows.
So, and this is the process of blocking.
Another example that
occurs often in genomics,
is let's suppose you're studying mice.
And the mice have litters, okay.
So, every collection of
parents of a litter,
they might have five or
six mice in a litter.
Okay?
But there's genetic inheritance
that occurs from the litter, so
if you're studying something, why not
randomize it within litters of mice,
rather than to all the little mice
regardless of what parents they had?
The reason for blocking on parents.
Right?
Is to control whatever genetic factors
are associated with the parents.
So, that's another example,
blocking is another example of
experimental design that we'll cover.
S,o hopefully this has given you a bird's
eye view of some potential techniques that
you can use, to think about observational
data analysis, and experimental design.
And hopefully after this lecture,
you know that there is a dichotomy
between instances where you
have the idealized setting,
where you have complete control over
the whole experimental process,
versus the other end of the spectrum where
you have no control and you have purely
observational data, and of course
there's lots of gray areas in between.
But hopefully this will get you thinking
about the strengths and weaknesses and
potentials and
pitfalls of each of the different sorts.
In the next couple of lectures we're
gonna go over some of the details.